#manual{_}{700}{contributors}
Listing contributors of this language

#toc

#section External

#subsection PyPy/RPython community & staff

These people have created invaluable tools for creating new
interpreters.

The RPython lays out the foundations for the Lever language.

#subsection Laurence Tratt

Wrote the blog posts that led me to try out RPython.
"Fast Enough VMs in Fast Enough Time"

#subsection LLVM community

A source to many useful compiler-related papers. The
community has been surprisingly helpful even if we have not
used the LLVM compiler directly in this project.

#subsection Jeffrey Keggler

The author for the Marpa parsing algorithm. His website and
papers collect up bunch of improvements into Earley parser
that make it much more useful and easier to implement.

Context-free grammars are an important human-interfacing
element these days. The resulting tools I wrote based on
Jeffrey's papers were incredibly valuable for the
development of my language.

#subsection r/programminglanguages and #;proglangdesign

A programming language community sitting in reddit and IRC.
This community has provided an useful reflection surface.
Once in a while I throw them with ideas and get some useful
insights that led to better choices.

#subsection Stackless Python

The Stackless Python is worth mentioning here because they
provided green threads into Python, and continuations to
RPython. This work allows us to skip all the stupid and
non-working "solutions" and concentrate on the difficult
problems at asynchronous concurrency.

#subsection Libuv

Libuv lacks features, but for now this library has helped me
out a lot. Although this library isn't perfect by any count,
it has provided cross-platform features I haven't had to
implement myself.



#section Internal

#subsection Alexander Higgins

The first person who contributed significant code to the
project and learnt how the runtime is put together.



#subsection Robert Kiraly

Helped me with the documentation, provided advice and
support.

#subsection Domantas Mauruƒça

Wrote a superfluous len(x) -function when we have x.length
to retrieve length from a container. The guy contributed
early on and provided motivation for improving
the documentation.


#subsection Henri Tuhola

I started this project. I am leading the maintenance and
development.


#section You're not on the list?

If you think someone or you should be on this list, send a
message to the maintainers which explains why you should be
on the contributors list.
